From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Tech companies are racing to build
thousands of massive data centers to
power the AI revolution. And to find the
land they need, [music] they're
barreling into rural communities across
America.
Their pitch is the data centers will
bring good jobs, [music] revenue, and a
foothold in a rapidly changing economy.
But not [music] everyone's buying it.
Today, my colleague Karen Weise tells
the story of one county [music] pushing
back against Big Tech and what happens
when AI comes [music] to town.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It's Monday, February 16th.
Karen, I'm so happy to have you back on
the show. So happy to be here with you.
Okay, we've come to you because you
cover some of the biggest tech companies
in America. And what that's meant
recently is covering artificial
intelligence. And specifically, what
you've been focusing on is the
infrastructure that drives the AI
revolution, which they're all involved
in. And that's data centers. You've been
reporting on the conflicted and often
complicated way that communities are
responding to these data centers. And
that's what we want to talk about today.
But before we get there, just help us
understand this data center boom. What
does it actually look like? Yes,
exactly. I mean, when Chat GPT first
came out, initially a lot of the
reporting was about chatbots, but very
quickly this major theme started
emerging every quarter when the
companies would report their earnings.
And what you started seeing is more and
more money being spent building data
centers all around the country and the
globe. And what's happening is the data
centers are getting bigger and there's
more of them. And so the scale is just
really hard to wrap your head around.
Mhm. What do you mean by that? What are
we talking about here?
Well, in the last year, just four
companies, Amazon, Google, Meta, and
Microsoft spent $400 billion
on capital expenditures. And most of
that is data centers. And just to put a
fine point on it, like $400 billion is
giant. I mean, like we're talking GDP of
countries level money. Yes, exactly. And
it And it's actually become this
powerful economic force across the
country.
You have people moving all over the
country to build these projects. Do you
have kind of almost every industry you
can imagine is getting pulled into this.
You have speculators, you have
developers, utilities, energy generators
that come in together and push these
projects in so many places because there
is such a big demand for the computing
power that lives in these buildings
right now. And we're at this moment
where despite all of this building and
all the speed, there's actually not
enough data centers available for the
demand that people have. So the
companies are racing to get them up as
quickly as they can.
So tell me about that demand. Why is
there so much money going into data
centers?
So it's for artificial intelligence. And
this is both to train artificial
intelligence. These are the systems and
models that underpin the technology that
we use when you ask ChatGPT something or
there's a system behind the scenes at
your company doing some process that
someone used to do manually. And some of
it is to use artificial intelligence
because the way they power their ideas
is by running a lot of calculations at
once. And so you need bigger data
centers, more powerful chips, much more
power to cool those chips, and the
largest AI data centers could use as
much power as a million American homes.
Wow. [music] In the data center world,
what people talk about is not the square
footage of a building like you might
think about for a commercial building.
They talk about the power demands
because the power demands is what is
most important and really symbolizes the
true size of a project.
>> [music]
>> And that power demand requires a lot of
resources, I have to assume. Yes, so you
have a hundred different things
happening here. You need a lot of
buildings for the data centers
themselves. You need the power lines and
the substations to transmit the power to
them. And we're also seeing this kind of
boom in new generation of power because
electricity use was relatively flat for
quite a long time in this country, and
now we're seeing this big growth in
demand primarily because of data
centers. So now the tech companies are
scouring the country for places to
build. They want big lots of land with
available power, with good transmission
lines, good connectivity, and ideally a
community that wants them. And now we
have communities all over the place
trying to figure out, is this what they
want? If so, what do they want to get
out of it? And do they have power to
support it or stop it? And it's it's
really led to this kind of ground-up
swell in so many places. It's hard to
actually keep track of the number of
places that are now having these debates
in all these kind of wonky small
municipal spaces in like county
commission rooms and in utility
commissions because it drags up all of
these questions about what do we want?
Our valuable resources, our space, our
power, our water. What do we want it to
be used for? Okay, I want to dig in on
these fights. I want to understand like
how they work at a really granular
level. You have visited many of these
sites and I wonder if there's one that
you would pick that would help us kind
of get inside what this actually looks
like, how it plays out. Yeah, I would
look at St. Joseph County, Indiana. And
it had no data centers a couple of years
ago essentially. And then in the past
two or so years you've seen tens of
billions of dollars flow in there. And a
community that went from not much
response to kind of an overwhelming
tide shifting against these projects.
And so I really think it shows some of
these dynamics that we're seeing
repeated all over the country. All
right, what has happened there? It
sounds like this development has
happened really quickly.
Yes, so St. Joseph County, it's in the
northern part of the state. South Bend
is the big city, but the rest of the
county is primarily agricultural. And
the regional economy has been looking
for new opportunities. It's kind of like
the upper Midwest towns that saw a lot
of work bottom out. Studebaker was based
there and they lost all those automotive
jobs.
And the county has been working to
attract industrial clients for a long
time. Now, flash forward to May 2023
and the utility comes to the county
economic development office with Amazon.
And this is exactly what's happening
around the country is the utilities
found themselves in this business of
matching the customers, these tech
companies, with the lands they know of
in their territory that are available
and would be well suited for this type
of project. And what do they see as the
benefits of an Amazon coming to town in
this way? Just sketch that out for me.
The economic development office sees
this as a great project. It is enormous.
It's $11 billion at least. And from that
they see a source of tax revenue. They
see it as a great jobs producer,
particularly during construction, and
just a way of using their land and
resources to be part of this future
economy that we all hear about, that
this technology is the future.
And it turns out that this was this
flagship AI data center that Amazon was
building for one of the leading AI labs
called Anthropic. You may have heard of
their chatbot called Claude.
>> Mhm. And they were building this data
center to act as one giant computer for
Anthropic to use to train its next
generation of models and eventually to
be able to use it to start deploying AI
services as well. And so for both sides
this became a really kind of valuable
opportunity. They see it as a win-win.
So huge project for Amazon, it sounds
like. What is the community feeling at
this point? Initially, not much. I mean
there was not a huge debate locally. I
believe only two people voted against it
in the county council because it just
wasn't a big deal. People didn't know
much about it. And so they got going and
they built very quickly.
I mean within a year they had, I believe
it was like a dozen buildings up. And
very quickly you end up with thousands
of workers on site every day. And that
is both a good and a bad. You have a lot
of money flowing through that. The
hotels are full and the occupancy tax
for hotels is flowing back to the
county. You have people locally getting
jobs. The apprenticeships programs have
grown. All of these benefits. But you
also end up with a lot of downsides.
There is legitimately terrible traffic
around there. There's safety concerns
about accidents. You know, there's just
a lot of commotion that comes with a
project this large and people start
wrapping their heads more around the
power use and the water use and those
are very sensitive issues.
And at the same time, other data center
projects start popping up around the
county and the region more broadly. And
so Microsoft goes into contract on a
site in another part of the county. And
then there's other rumors constantly
swirling when we were there, oh, we
heard this parcel might be a meta
project. There's Google doing something.
There's just this constant crescendo of
new projects popping up and people are
just unnerved by it basically,
particularly as they're living through
this.
And then there comes this new project
last year, even bigger than the Amazon
project potentially, $13 billion
or 1,000 acres. But with this one,
there's a catch. They need a zoning
change to be able to build this big data
center and that means that it needs to
go before the community, before the
county council to decide, will they
approve this project or not? And that
means these elected officials now need
to listen to their community and decide,
do they want more data centers or have
they had enough and are they going to
draw a line?
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Karen, you just set up this big choice
facing St. Joseph County, whether to
green-light this new data center, this
new massive project or say no. So, how
does that play out? What actually
happens? So, this new project, it's not
clear who's behind it. It's an anonymous
LLC. There's only a handful of companies
in the world that would use as much
computing power, but no one knows who it
is. And that anonymity really amplifies
the anxiety over the project. And the
project needs zoning approval from the
county to continue. And so, the
supporters of the DNA centers start
mounting their own campaign trying to
say, "Yes, some people don't want it,
but there's kind of like a silent
majority that really wants this and
wants the tax dollars that we
desperately need." And eventually,
there's a hearing in December.
That's kind of the final yay or nay on
this rezoning.
>> Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, and
welcome.
The regular meeting of the St. Joseph
County Council for Tuesday, December the
9th, 2025 is now called to order.
And it becomes kind of the capsule for
all of these arguments for and against
it. Creator God,
we take a deep breath.
We pray this evening for wisdom.
And it's in South Bend. It's in the main
municipal building. It's sort of a
windowless room with a bunch of seats.
There's at least 100 people in the main
lobby, in addition to the crowd that is
out in the side lobby, in addition to
the crowd that's here in the main room.
This is
amazing.
There is total overflow capacity. They
have people signing on on Zoom. They
actually max out their Zoom capacity
watching packed. It's packed. It's
packed.
Folks,
I was saving this, but I'll say it now.
It's going to be very, very important
that we keep decorum tonight
because we have a very emotional topic
we're going to be discussing. And the
county council starts out by really
pleading for peace. We're we're going to
address a number of misinformation items
right off the bat. First up, our
representatives for the new project. And
they come forth and try to make their
case. As this project does not require
the amount of water that has been
previously discussed. They say they've
addressed the water and energy concerns
that the community has been raising.
You could not pick a a more perfect
location based on infrastructure and
electrical infrastructure than this
site. And that the project should be
approved. And with that, I will stop
talking for a while.
And then comes the moment that people
have sort of been waiting for.
We will open the public hearing on bill
number 42-25. [music]
Which is the public testimony, where
people can voice their concern. Is there
anyone in the room who would like to
speak in favor of the bill? Please sign
in and state your name and address for
the record. You have 3 minutes. [music]
And they open it up to supporters of the
project. James Gardner, representative
of the International Union of Operating
Engineers and part of the state building
trades. Good evening. My name is Murray
Milam, the business manager for the
Labor's Local 645.
>> Piontek, assistant business manager with
IBEW 153. Bob Byers, business manager
for Iron Workers Local 292 here in South
Bend, Indiana. Hello, my name is
Nicholas Klein. I'm a business
representative of IUOE Local 150. I'm
here to speak in favor of the rezoning
on behalf of trades workers all over our
county. So the majority of the
supporters of the project are either
union workers or people who represent
union workers. And they're saying The
job site has helped me support my own
family with steady work and great
benefits. With the projects that are
going on currently,
um we have over doubled the size of our
apprenticeship and we look to do the
same again if this gets rezoned and goes
through. This has been a huge boon to
the people that live locally. I was
accepted to the Operating Engineers
Local 150 at 19 years old with no
student debt, making great money.
This is only possible through the
economic developments like these
projects. Take a drive around Indiana.
Towns that have had a factory close or
refuse new development projects become
ghost towns.
>> [music]
>> Don't take it for granted. The improved
county economy happens because we have
said yes to new development
opportunities, not because we have
turned them down. And then there is
another group of supporters,
>> [music]
>> primarily business leaders and advocates
who are making a broader appeal. They're
basically saying we should adapt and be
part of this future. It's about planning
smartly, ensuring our land use aligns
with our future needs,
>> [music]
>> and giving our community the tools to
thrive in a competitive economy. And
this is a technological necessity and we
have to ride with that. We have to go
with that.
We can do this data center and we can
all win. Thank you.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So you have these business leaders at
the county level kind of parroting what
the Silicon Valley folks have been
saying, that this is part of what's
happening in our economy and we just
need to get on board. And at the same
time, you have the union folks making a
very tangible argument saying that pitch
that the company and our local officials
made about the promise of these data
centers, that's actually paying off for
us. Like this is a huge benefit for
those of us that are blue-collar
workers.
These jobs are very good. They pay a lot
of money. I mean, I've talked to
electricians that make $200,000 a year.
I mean, it's Yes.
Yes, it is real money. And people are
moving there if they don't live there
already. The hotels are full. You have
RV parks. I mean, people are feeling
this and feeding into this economy. Is
there anyone else online that would like
to speak in favor of this bill?
Okay. But after about 25 minutes We'll
move on then. Is there anyone in the
room that would like to speak in
opposition to this bill? Please sign in,
state your name and address for the
record. You have 3 minutes. They turned
to the opponents.
>> [music]
>> What I want to say is a family 68 years
ago came here for the peacefulness, the
quiet, the small-town quality of life.
>> And that's where you start hours upon
hours of testimony of people talking
about why they don't want this project.
The public has a right to know up front
who is vying for our land and tax
abatements. Some people talk about more
procedural concerns. Our children
deserve more than concrete and traffic.
They deserve a place where they can
freely run, ride bikes down quiet roads,
and gaze at a sky full of stars. And
other people talk about kind of quality
of life issues of what it's like living
through this construction. [music]
>> I was mowing the grass beside the road
when cars going opposite direction at
high speeds passed right beside me. Not
only did it scare the hell out of me, it
sprayed gravel all over me and all over
the mower. Other people talked about
environmental concerns. Data centers are
significant contributors to local air
pollution because of Yeah, wells are
going to dry up.
>> Primarily, it's the [music] loss of the
open lands. And you also heard concerns
over the future of artificial
intelligence. I have done my research
and I know that technology is evolving
and in the next few years the next
generation of data centers won't need as
much electricity or water or space. What
happens if these buildings aren't
necessary anymore? What do we do when
we're left with hundreds of big empty
shells? Will we be stuck with all these
empty buildings?
And you also just saw a broader anxiety
that this [music] is a
future that we're not sure we want.
>> Where stocks continue to rise while
employment falls, allowing for the
owners to get richer at the expense of
the working class.
This correlated precisely with the
creation of chat GPT. I don't really
think that human extinction is coming,
but the fact that the people who know
this way, way better than any of us are
totally freaked out about it really
should give us pause. And So, it really
ran the concern from [music] the kind of
practical, local kind of ground-level
community stuff to these bigger picture
what is this all even for?
Why are we racing to support this?
>> There's a reason they're coming here to
build this, guys. It's cuz they think
we're stupid. They think that no one
cares about us. They think that we're
desperate, and they think they're going
to get away with it.
>> They don't trust the future that is
being presented to them.
>> So, the only real question that you
should be asking yourselves is will you
once again believe the false promise
[music] of industry?
Thank you for your time. And so, after
all this testimony you get to the
[music] end. And with those comments, I
will take a motion.
>> It's like 4:00 a.m. Woah.
>> And yes, this ran all night.
>> Oh my gosh.
>> Motion to deny.
They vote. It they did denial motion is
7-2. 7-2 denial.
And ultimately, they reject the project.
They had decided enough.
>> [music]
>> Meaning the council essentially has said
we're done with this. So, this was from
the perspective of the community overall
a successful fight against this one data
center in St. Joseph County.
Is that a pattern that you're seeing,
Karen? I know you're looking at this
across the country. Are other places
coming together in this way and having
success from blocking these data
centers? Yes. I mean, this is happening.
You see communities reject projects, but
the amount of building is only going to
grow in the coming years. You know, the
companies all announce their investment
plans for this year, and it is way more
than last year. I mean, we're going to
blow past half a trillion dollars this
year. Wow.
>> And so, the reality is the companies
need this to happen, and they are
signing more big deals. They are trying
to go to multiple places at once
because they they have a real pressure
to get data centers built and powered
and operational. Okay, I want to talk
about that, but first, how are the tech
companies, if at all, responding to the
pushback? I mean, are they contending
with the concerns people have? Yes. I
mean, you're starting to see more
acknowledgement of these issues, and
some are subtle. Some is literally
branding. So, increasingly, you hear the
tech companies talk about data centers
more as AI factories.
>> Hm. Everyone likes a factory in that it
produces something useful in the
economy, and that is, of course, why
they are trying to pursue this
opportunity is they see it as a great
opportunity that it can make companies
and people more productive. It can, you
know, solve cancer and all of these
things. And so, they're trying to
elevate this industrial building,
basically, and say it contributes to
this future. You also see more
acknowledgements to what the community
might want. Like, Microsoft came out
with a patch saying that they wouldn't
ask for a property tax breaks. They said
that they would disclose water use in
different locations. Amazon, in a
different project in Indiana, made very
substantial upfront financial
commitments. I believe it was about a
hundred million dollars to this one town
that they're looking to put a new data
center in. So, you're starting to see
ways that they're responding, and
they're also just activating
politically. I mean, it came out in this
hearing, people were saying they got
text messages, they got door-to-door
knockers, there were TV ads saying come
support these projects. So, there's a
sense that they're projecting of this is
the future, this is an inevitable
future, and you should be part of it.
Mhm. And you can choose to opt out, but
if you opt out, you could be left
behind. You will not capture that tax
revenue. You will not have these great
construction jobs that actually maybe
are harder to replace with AI. You know,
that you are missing out on all these
opportunities that are going to happen,
and that you can support, that you can
be the person that because this is in
your community, you know, we have better
doctors in rural areas, that you can
help solve cancer in a weird way because
that's what they're talking about of the
potential benefits for these systems.
And so, they're making this sell that it
is both an economic benefit locally, but
also you're part of a good
transformation that is happening, and
you don't want to miss out. Right. So,
you have these companies kind of
explicitly raising the stakes for all of
the people that are now faced with a
decision of whether to let this happen
or not. And at the same time, you also
have the federal government really
doubling down on AI, too, and doing a
lot to turbocharge this AI revolution.
And so,
these communities are also contending
with a White House and a president that
is very much behind this push.
Absolutely. Yeah, the Trump
administration has been very supportive
of all this. They see it as a national
security imperative. It's obviously been
very important for maintaining economic
growth, and they have done things like
fast-track data centers on federal land.
They want to speed up the creation of
new electricity sources and
interconnections and things like that
that you need for data centers. You've
even seen some states start considering
ways to claw back power from local
governments over this and not wanting
things to get held up by these zoning
concerns or these mechanisms that people
can use to resist them.
You know,
I wonder how much of this you feel,
Karen, is about people feeling as though
they don't have control in the middle of
this AI revolution. You know, the
companies are pitching this as
inevitable, get on the train or the
train's leaving the station without you.
The Trump administration is fully behind
it. And if you're just a regular person,
you may feel like AI in general and data
centers in particular,
all of this is kind of just being
imposed on you and you don't have a say
in it.
I think that's right. You know, you you
do hear those anxieties over and over
again. But I also think that we're
seeing ways communities are recognizing
their own power and that they do have
leverage. I mean, the tech companies
need these projects to happen. It is
critical for them. And so, it's a real
problem for them if these keep getting
shut down because there's only so many
places where you can go and build and do
this. And so, communities are realizing
that they do have some leverage.
And it's not every community, but you do
see places where people will pull out of
projects, where they'll relocate, or get
concessions. And that is a kind of new
dynamic because if you have good land
and you have power, you actually have
something extremely valuable right now.
And so, people are learning their way
that locally they can take control. And
it's not through federal policy, it's
through these like tiny little
windowless rooms where you sit through
hours and hours of community hearings
saying what you want in your community.
And that is how things are structured in
America, and there is local control over
many of these issues, state control over
many of these issues, and people are
finding those pressure points. Democracy
[music] in action. There you go.
Well, Karen, [music] thank you so much.
I really appreciate it. Anytime.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> We are connected spiritually, and we are
connected culturally. We want Europe to
be strong. We believe that Europe must
survive. On Friday, Secretary [music] of
State Marco Rubio addressed the Munich
Security Conference, where he emphasized
the shared history between the United
States and Europe. He also reiterated
the Trump administration's public
warnings that the West faces so-called
civilizational erasures. We opened our
doors to an unprecedented wave of mass
migration
that threatens the cohesion of our
societies,
the continuity of our culture,
and the future
of our people.
Rubio urged European nations to put
stricter limits on who [music] enters
their borders and to spend more on their
own defense, something President Trump
has long pushed for.
But his diplomatic tone came as a relief
to many in the audience who had become
[music] used to a more confrontational
approach from the administration.
Rubio lavished praise on Europe for its
cultural gifts to [music] the world. It
was this continent that produced the
genius of Mozart and Beethoven,
of Dante and Shakespeare, of
Michelangelo and Da Vinci. [music] From
the Renaissance masters of the Beatles
and the Rolling Stones to rock and roll
legends. And after stressing [music]
over and over again the deep ties
between the US and Europe,
Our home may be in the Western
Hemisphere, but we will always be a
child [music] of Europe.
Rubio received a standing ovation from
the mostly European crowd.
And it's important to recognize [music]
that the majority of the American people
find
>> [music]
>> this behavior
deeply troubling. Former President
Barack Obama indirectly addressed the
racist video that President [music]
Trump posted about him earlier this
month.
The video depicted Obama and his wife,
[music] former First Lady Michelle
Obama, as apes.
In an interview, podcaster Brian Tyler
Cohen asked Obama about how the public
discourse [music] had evolved and
mentioned the video as one example.
There doesn't seem to be any shame about
this
among people who
used to [music] feel
>> [snorts]
>> like you had to have some sort of
decorum and and and
uh
a sense of propriety
>> [music]
>> and respect for the office. Obama
lamented [music] what he called a clown
show on social media and TV and said
that respect for the dignity of public
office
>> [music]
>> had been lost.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Diana Winn and Astha Chaturvedi with
help from Michelle Monje, Anna [music]
Foley, and Mouge Zaidy.
It was edited by Mark George and Rachel
Quester with help from Brendan
Klinkenberg.
Contains music [music] by Pat McCusker,
Diane Wong, and Rowan Nemaier Stowe and
was engineered [music] by Chris Wood.
That's it for The [music] Daily. I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.
>> Hey.